(upbeat music)
- [Voiceover] As we watch
the history of man unfold,
we learn of a basic fact,
and that is nothing
stays the same.
But when it comes to grains,
this hardly seems true,
especially for the
ancient amaranth.
Amaranth is derived from
the Greek word amarantos,
which means "one
that does not wither"
or "the never fading."
This grain has
lived up to its name
because based on
historical data,
amaranth has been in
existence for 8,000 years.
If the Incas had quinoa,
the Aztecs had amaranth
or huauhtli in
their native tongue.
The 1400s saw the rise
of the Aztec empire
as well as the propagation
of the amaranth grain.
Because it was a native
crop to Mesoamerica,
it was practical and convenient
for the Aztecs to cultivate it.
They had the largest amaranth
fields during that age.
And amaranth became
their staple food source.
As a matter of fact, 80% of
their total calorie intake
came from amaranth.
Aside from its major
role in the Aztec's diet,
amaranth also had
a substantial part
in their religious affairs.
The Aztecs would sculpt
images of their war god,
Huitilpochtli, using
amaranth grains,
honey, and sacrificial
human blood.
Then they would worship
and parade these sculptures
around the streets
of Tenochtitlan
before the priests
break them into pieces
and distribute them to the
people for consumption,
a gesture symbolizing the
flesh and bones of the god.
Unfortunately, this
religious practice
was condemned by the Spanish
conquistadors in the 1520s.
Pedro de Alvarado, the first
European who saw this ritual,
described it as a mockery
of the catholic communion.
So Hernan Cortez, the leader
of the Spanish conquest,
in his goal of converting the
natives into Christianity,
outlawed amaranth.
Anyone caught planting,
selling, and eating it
would be penalized by death.
The Spanish conquest
rendered amaranth useless.
It continued to grow on its own
but was considered a
weed rather than a crop.
This is probably the
reason why its genetic base
remained unaltered
all these centuries.
True to its name,
amaranth didn't fade
or wither into obscurity.
From Central America, it
spread around the world
all the way to Africa,
India, and Nepal.
Amaranth is a pseudo grain
under the genus
classification Amaranthus.
There are around 60 different
species of amaranth.
And several of these are
cultivated up to this day.
Grown in large
areas in the north
and southwest of
the United States,
are Amaranthus cruentus,
Amaranthus caudatus,
and Amaranthus hypochondriacus.
While the species
Amaranthus blitum,
Amaranthus dubius,
and Amaranthus tricolor
are planted and
consumed primarily
as a leafy vegetable, like
spinach in eastern Asia.
Amaranth is a low
maintenance crop
which probably explains how it
survived all these centuries.
Though it's best grown
in high altitudes,
it still thrives well
in low lying areas.
It's adaptable to light,
loose, and moist soils.
And it can tolerate almost
any temperature or climate.
It can also grow in
sub-Sahara Africa
and similar topographies
where water is scarce,
especially during
the dry season.
Amaranth is a tall plant
averaging between five
and eight feet tall.
Depending on the species,
its broad leaves come in
maroon, yellow, and orange hues.
And its inflorescence ranges
from red, yellow, and green.
Its flowers can produce
60,000 seeds or grains,
which are then processed
into flour and cereal.
Amaranth may have been just a
weed at some point in history.
But like a true weed,
it was resilient
and adamant to survive and
regained its esteemed status
among the grains in
the modern world.
(upbeat music)
Amaranth belongs to the genus
classification Amaranthus.
And while it's a fact that
it's not a true cereal grain,
its nutrient profile
is still at par
with that of rice,
maize, and wheat.
Protein is amaranth's
best redeeming feature.
Some actually say that
its protein profile
can be described as
a complete protein
due to the high
levels of lysine,
an amino acid deficient
in most whole grains.
Its protein content
is also higher
compared to wheat and
other gluten-free grains.
One cup of raw amaranth
is packed with 28.1
grams of protein,
while oats only come in
second at 26.3 grams,
followed by white rice at 13.1.
In addition, molecular
biologists in Mexico
reported in 2008 that there are
lunasin-like peptides
in amaranth's protein.
Lunasin is considered to
have anti-cancer properties
as well as
anti-inflammatory properties
that can fight
chronic conditions
like diabetes, heart
disease, and stroke.
Like most grains,
amaranth has cholesterol
lowering capabilities.
In 2003 researchers at
the University of Guelph
in Ontario, Canada,
reported amaranth's
rich amounts of phytosterols
which can significantly
reduce blood cholesterol.
This was followed by another
scientific study in Russia
in 2007 showing that
inclusion of amaranth
in the diets of patients
with cardiovascular diseases
helped regulate
their cholesterol,
triglycerides, and LDL levels.
Iron, calcium, and magnesium,
these are amaranth's
top three minerals.
Comparing it with
wheat and rice,
amaranth is undeniably superior.
Rice and wheat contain 0.8
and 6.3 milligrams
of iron respectively
whereas amaranth
contains 7.6 milligrams.
Rice trails behind in magnesium
content at 25 milligrams.
Wheat is significantly
higher at 239 milligrams.
But amaranth is still at
the top with 248 milligrams.
In terms of calcium content,
rice and wheat don't
even come close.
Rice only has 28 milligrams.
Wheat only has 39 milligrams,
while amaranth has
159 milligrams.
It is also a good source
of other dietary minerals
such as potassium, zinc,
copper, and manganese.
Amaranth is also
loaded with vitamins.
It has vitamin A for
overall eye health.
Vitamin B, specifically
thiamin, niacin, and riboflavin
for increased and
efficient metabolism.
Folate for red blood
cell generation,
anemia prevention,
and in the log run,
decreased risk of dementia.
Studies also reported
that there are
small amounts of vitamin C
in amaranth leaves and oil.
If many find amaranth's
colorful flowers and foliage
perfect as ornaments, its
effects and contribution
to one's health should be
highly regarded as well.
Amaranth is one
tiny ancient seed
that must not be
taken for granted.
(upbeat music)
Amaranth's fascinating history
and impressive nutrient profile
are not the only
factors that contribute
to its recent rise
to popularity.
Its adaptability and tolerance
to almost any type
of soil, temperature,
climate, and elevation also
make it a global grain crop.
It has established
itself as an important
and versatile crop, not
only in South America
but all the way to
Greece and Asia.
In the Aztec's book of accounts
called the Codex Mendoza,
the Emperor Montezuma received
20,000 tons of amaranth
from his people as
annual tributes.
During the Aztec month
of Panquetzaliztli,
which in the modern calendar
is from December 7 to 26,
the Aztecs would fast
or eat very little
as part of their festivities
dedicated to the
god Huitzilopochtli.
And then they would partake in
the statue of Huitzilopochtli
made from amaranth grain, honey,
and even human
sacrificial blood.
Even though the Spanish
conquerors banned amaranth,
it prevailed in the
traditional Mexican sweet bar
called Alegria,
which means "joy."
Amaranth grains are
popped, shaped into bars
with honey and sunflower
and pumpkin seeds.
These Alegria bars
are often associated
with the Mexican Dia de Muertos
or Day of the Dead celebration.
Amaranth's leaves and flowers,
specifically that of the
Amaranthus cruentus species
also served a purpose for the
Native American tribe Zuni.
The Zuni people would ground
the feathery part of
the plant into a meal
and use the plant's red hue
to color ceremonial breads.
They would crush and moisten
the leaves and flowers
and use them as blush
or rouge for cheeks.
For the ancient Greeks,
amaranth was a sacred
flower to Lady Ephesus,
a distinct form of
the Goddess Artemis.
It symbolized immortality
and was used to ornate tubes
and sculptures of the gods.
The seeds, leaves, and
roots of the species
Amaranthus viridis and
Amaranthus spinosus
have multiple
medicinal uses in Asia.
Seeds are ground and
leaves are commonly used
as a poultice or
dressing for wounds.
In China it's used against
mild internal bleeding,
dysentery,
gastric ulcer,
gallstones,
and as a topical for
boils and abscesses.
In the Philippines the leaves
are used on insect bites,
rashes,
sunburn,
as a topical for
eczema and psoriasis,
and to lower fever
due to infections.
In India it's used
to treat indigestion,
nausea,
and bladder infections.
The root is chewed with salt
to alleviate toothaches.
The stem is ground
for foot sores.
And the seeds are
used to treat coughs.
In Nepal,
leaves are used to dress burns
and together with the root,
it's boiled as a
laxative for children
and for excessive
menstrual bleeding.
Malaysia, Cambodia, and Borneo
also use amaranth to treat
similar medical and
health conditions.
Ornament,
food,
herbal medicine.
It seems like amaranth's
wonders are simply endless.
(upbeat music)
Like the ancient quinoa,
amaranth is slowly
making a comeback.
It was a forgotten crop
a few decades back.
But in the 1970s
positive research results
in the United States revitalized
the amaranth industry.
Farmers started to cultivate it
in unexpected
regions, such as Iowa,
Nebraska,
Missouri,
North Dakota,
and even New York.
The National Academy of Sciences
also recommended the
inclusion of amaranth
to the American diet.
Outside of South America
and the United States,
amaranth is also now grown
and harvested in India,
China,
Russia,
Thailand,
Nigeria,
and the Czech Republic.
Amaranth was also
germinated in outer space.
Crew members experimented
on cultivating amaranth
while on board the space
shuttle Atlantis in 1985.
Amaranth cookies were
also a part of their menu
during their flight.
Flour is the top product
manufactured from amaranth.
Bakers and patisseries
can actually replace
25 to 30% of their
ordinary flour
and wheat flour
with amaranth flour
to get a higher quality
of protein in baked goods.
Due to its versatility
and adaptability,
amaranth is also one
of the several grains,
along with quinoa,
considered by
international governments
and health organizations
that can solve malnutrition
and of course food security,
especially in drought areas.
In Mexico, amaranth's
native land,
government officials
have launched efforts
to revive grain
as a staple food.
Motives behind this are not
only to foster and reinforce
old Mexican traditions,
but also to lay
down the groundwork
of amaranth's future
socioeconomic viability.
Corn is Mexico's
major produce today.
But officials have speculated
that with the current
changes in climate patterns,
corn production will
decrease by the year 2080.
And since amaranth is more
tolerant to high temperature,
the future of the
country's crop production
and industry lies in
this ancient grain.
Mexico has also
included amaranth
in its national
crusade against hunger
to fight malnutrition
and obesity.
Amaranth may have lost
its sacred vestiges.
But it seems likely to remain
and to provide sustenance
for generations to come.
(upbeat music)
The Aztecs had a
very interesting way
of consuming and
enjoying amaranth grains.
And thanks to modern cooking
techniques and recipes,
amaranth with honey
and human blood
is now out of the menu.
The texture of cooked
amaranth is very unique
compared to most grains
that soften when boiled.
Amaranth softens too,
but only on the inside.
Its outer layer
retains its crunch,
which is why amaranth grains
seem to pop when chewed.
Amaranth absorbs more liquid,
so use the ratio
one is to three,
one cup of grain to
three cups of water.
To cook, just bring it to a boil
and then let it simmer
for another 20 minutes
or until grains are fluffy.
For porridge recipes,
just add another half
to one cup of water.
You can also pop amaranth
seeds like popcorn.
Over high heat, preheat a pot
and put the seeds, one
tablespoon at a time.
Wait until all seeds are popped,
then remove from the pot.
Popped amaranth can
be served with milk
like any other cereal.
Since amaranth is gluten free,
breads and cookies made
from 100% amaranth flour
will not rise properly.
That's why it's
advised to mix it
with other flours with gluten
or starches (indistinct)
that can perform as
leavening agents.
Here are some recipes
using amaranth.
First is blueberry
amaranth porridge.
You will need 1 1/2
cups of amaranth,
2 1/2 cups of water,
2 1/2 cups of milk,
two tablespoons of butter,
1/3 cup of heavy cream,
1/2 cup of blueberries,
and four tablespoons
of maple syrup.
Put a saucepan over high heat.
Then combine amaranth,
water, milk, and butter.
Bring it to a boil.
Simmer for 20 minutes
and stir occasionally
to achieve a thicker
and creamier texture,
then whisk in heavy
cream and blueberries,
scoop the mixture
into serving bowls
and drizzle with maple syrup.
The second recipe is
amaranth chicken stew.
Just prepare one cup
of cooked amaranth,
one kilogram of boneless
and skinless chicken breast,
six cups of water,
a pinch of basil,
a pinch of rosemary,
a pinch of black pepper,
and a teaspoon of minced garlic.
Slow cook chicken
along with the spices
in a crockpot of water
for about six hours.
You can keep the
chicken breasts whole
or you can first chop
it into smaller pieces
while inside the pot.
Then put the cooked amaranth,
stir well, and serve.
Amaranth may have
had a bloody past,
but that will not stop
this unfading grain
from reclaiming fame.
Actually, as more and more
people turn to healthier foods,
amaranth's luster
only seems to shine
even brighter tomorrow
and in the years to come.
(upbeat music)